---------------------------------------------------------------
Excerpt from Chapter 12 of Brave New World by Aldous Huxley
---------------------------------------------------------------

   
"Well, I'd rather be unhappy than have the sort of false, lying happiness you
were having here."

    "I like that," said Bernard bitterly. "When it's
you who were the cause of it all. Refusing to come to my party and so turning
them all against me!" He knew that what he was saying was absurd in its
injustice; he admitted inwardly, and at last even aloud, the truth of all that
the Savage now said about the worthlessness of friends who could be turned upon
so slight a provocation into persecuting enemies. But in spite of this knowledge
and these admissions, in spite of the fact that his friend's support and
sympathy were now his only comfort, Bernard continued perversely to nourish,
along with his quite genuine affection, a secret grievance against the Savage,
to mediate a campaign of small revenges to be wreaked upon him. Nourishing a
grievance against the Arch-Community-Songster was useless; there was no
possibility of being revenged on the Chief Bottler or the Assistant
Predestinator. As a victim, the Savage possessed, for Bernard, this enormous
superiority over the others: that he was accessible. One of the principal
functions of a friend is to suffer (in a milder and symbolic form) the
punishments that we should like, but are unable, to inflict upon our
enemies.

    Bernard's other victim-friend was Helmholtz. When, discomfited,
he came and asked once more for the friendship which, in his prosperity, he had
not thought it worth his while to preserve. Helmholtz gave it; and gave it
without a reproach, without a comment, as though he had forgotten that there had
ever been a quarrel. Touched, Bernard felt himself at the same time humiliated
by this magnanimityâ€“a magnanimity the more extraordinary and therefore the
more humiliating in that it owed nothing to soma and everything to Helmholtz's
character. It was the Helmholtz of daily life who forgot and forgave, not the
Helmholtz of a half-gramme holiday. Bernard was duly grateful (it was an
enormous comfort to have his friend again) and also duly resentful (it would be
pleasure to take some revenge on Helmholtz for his generosity).

    At their
first meeting after the estrangement, Bernard poured out the tale of his
miseries and accepted consolation. It was not till some days later that he
learned, to his surprise and with a twinge of shame, that he was not the only
one who had been in trouble. Helmholtz had also come into conflict with
Authority.

    "It was over some rhymes," he explained. "I was giving my
usual course of Advanced Emotional Engineering for Third Year Students. Twelve
lectures, of which the seventh is about rhymes. 'On the Use of Rhymes in Moral
Propaganda and Advertisement,' to be precise. I always illustrate my lecture
with a lot of technical examples. This time I thought I'd give them one I'd
just written myself. Pure madness, of course; but I couldn't resist it." He
laughed. "I was curious to see what their reactions would be. Besides," he
added more gravely, "I wanted to do a bit of propaganda; I was trying to
engineer them into feeling as I'd felt when I wrote the rhymes. Ford!" He
laughed again. "What an outcry there was! The Principal had me up and
threatened to hand me the immediate sack. l'm a marked man." 
